This question relates to the phenomenon of
dyavu. The question is, "Excuse me, teacher, I have a question.
Why is it that when we do something we've never
done before in a new situation, we
feel a sense of familiarity, as if we've done it
before?" This is called the
phenomenon of dyavu. I'll tell you a
story from my own experience. Once, I
was on duty, and on my way back, it was
afternoon. While driving, I passed by
Tuan Chau and looked up
at the hill. When I saw the hillside, I
saw a scene like
that, a pine forest. When my mind was drawn
to it, it was due to karma. I'm not saying
I had any results from my practice, but I'm
saying that at that moment, it could be a karmic connection.
I naturally felt that the hillside
looked familiar, so I directed my mind
towards it. When I see a
similar scene, I feel a sense of
familiarity, a feeling of seeing something from my past life. But at that moment, it was very profound, so
I clearly understood
everything that happened in that past life. Because of
that identical scene...  I'm
noticing that feeling of coolness in
my heart. I realize that some
people dream
about something and the next day it's exactly the same.
That's like karma returning to the
past, meaning that
similar events happened before. It happens to me
in that area. When I was little, I used to
dream a lot about the
forests I had visited and
played in, and the next time I went there, I would go there again. That is, when I was
little, I used to go to those places.
Maybe the night before I
would dream that the next day I went to a
new place. It was exactly like the
old scene, very familiar, and that
familiarity made me not
afraid because I knew it. I just
went there, and I was very happy and
joyful. That's when, when
I knew about it, my heart was
happy. For example, I went to play in the
fields, or I went somewhere else, and my heart was
very happy, and the next day
I actually went to that place.  If something
feels familiar to me, it's because in a
past life I had a
passionate joy, and I recognized that place and
remembered it for a long time—that's what you call "love" for that place.
So now, when I go to
that place, I feel very familiar. It's like when
you meet someone, and after the
first greeting, you already feel fond of them.
That's because in a past life,
you and they had a connection.
Sometimes, when you work with
someone, you naturally feel a sense of
harmony; one person understands the other's intentions.
Even though it's the first meeting,
in a past life, you and they
have worked together and
understood each other very well. One person tells the other, and the
other listens. That's why I
advise everyone that when we
practice Buddhism, we should
be close to each other, share, and listen to
each other so that in the next life, when we meet again,
we can climb that ladder
and not encounter
people who are completely new and incomprehensible to each other. For example, if
our minds are always annoyed with everyone we interact with...  If
you're annoyed and can't get
along with anyone, you'll naturally
distance yourself from those people.
Your unpleasant mindset will resonate with
those who are also easily annoyed, creating a connection
with you. Being born and working in the same
place means you
feel uneasy and frustrated with everyone you meet, and
others don't understand your intentions. Your
work won't go smoothly.
Therefore, we must cultivate this mindset: when we
do something, we
must learn to get along with those around us,
understand each other, listen to each other, support
each other, and help each other develop.
This awareness will lead
us to seek out those
who know how to listen,
share, and support each other in
our work and circumstances. We
should also rejoice in things that
benefit many people so that in our next life
we ​​will be born into
similar or even better circumstances.
Therefore, the phenomenon of déjà vu is a phenomenon where,
in a past life, we have already done this
in this place or setting, so
we feel familiar with it.  We feel it is
familiar and close to us, and to
expand this, we should
create many such phenomena for ourselves so that in our
next life,
wherever we go, we will feel familiar, accustomed, and
proficient in
good deeds. Therefore, this phenomenon is
very good, and we should
cultivate it so that wherever we go, we
feel this is our home, without feeling any
fear; wherever we go, we feel this is
our friend, without feeling any distance; wherever we go, we
feel this is our relative,
truly familiar with each other. This is because
our hearts are good and virtuous, and we will connect
with good and virtuous people. We will see people and
say, "Whatever you wish for, you will get."
This phenomenon of davu must be
cultivated through good deeds, so that
in our next life, wherever we go, we will be familiar
with good deeds.
[Music]
ch l